>> Reporter: ALONG THE STREETS
OF SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO,
GRAFFITI READING "NO MORE ABUSE"
AND "FASCISM IN PUERTO RICO" ARE
A WINDOW INTO THE UNREST SPARKED
BY THE LARGEST FINANCIAL CRISIS
IN THE ISLAND'S HISTORY.
SINCE JANUARY, THOUSANDS HAVE
PROTESTED AUSTERITY MEASURES AND
CUTS TO PUBLIC SERVICES IMPOSED
ON THIS U.S. TERRITORY THAT'S
HOME TO 3.4 MILLION U.S.
CITIZENS.
BUT PUERTO RICO CURRENTLY OWES
CREDITORS A MASSIVE $72-BILLION
DOLLARS.
LAST YEAR, FOLLOWING A SERIES OF
DEFAULTS ON DEBT PAYMENTS,
CONGRESS PASSED, AND PRESIDENT
OBAMA SIGNED, THE PUERTO RICO
OVERSIGHT MANAGEMENT AND
ECONOMIC STABILITY ACT, OR
"PROMESA," WHICH MEANS "PROMISE"
IN SPANISH.
THE LAW GAVE A FINANCIAL
OVERSIGHT BOARD VETO POWER OVER
PUERTO RICO'S BUDGET AND
PROVIDED A PROCESS TO
RESTRUCTURE THE DEBT.
DID YOU REALIZE WHAT YOU WERE
GETTING YOURSELF INTO?
>> I DID NOT.
>> Reporter: JOSE CARRION, WHO
RUNS A LARGE INSURANCE BROKERAGE
IN SAN JUAN, CHAIRS THE
APPOINTED SEVEN MEMBER BOARD.
>> THE BUDGET WAS UNBALANCED BY
AROUND $3-BILLION DOLLARS.
SO WE HAD TO BEGIN GETTING OUR
FISCAL AFFAIRS IN ORDER, AND
THAT ENTAILED DIFFICULT
DECISIONS AS TO, YOU KNOW, MAJOR
SPENDING.
>> Reporter: THOSE DIFFICULT
DECISIONS INCLUDED CUTS TO
PENSION PAYMENTS FOR RETIRED
GOVERNMENT WORKERS, REDUCING
SPENDING ON HEALTHCARE, CLOSING
179 PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND REDUCING
THE GOVERNMENT WORKFORCE.
SINCE 2013, NEARLY 30,000
GOVERNMENT WORKERS HAVE LOST
THEIR JOBS.
ROXANA PEREZ HAD WORKED AS AN
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT FOR THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN CAROLINA, A
TOWN OUTSIDE OF SAN JUAN.
>> (translated): I LOVE
SERVING MY COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: SHE'S NOW LOOKING
FOR A NEW JOB, BUT IT'S NOT
EASY.
THE UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IN PUERTO
RICO IS 11%, TWO-AND-A-HALF
TIMES THE U.S. RATE.
I ASKED WHETHER SHE WAS WORRIED
THE POSITION COULD BE CUT, GIVEN
THE DEBT CRISIS.
>> (translated): I HAD FAITH
THAT MAYBE THERE WOULD BE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO CONTINUE.
THERE IS A REAL NEED FOR CIVIL
EMPLOYEES HERE AT THE PUERTO
RICAN POLICE, BELIEVE ME.
>> Reporter: THIS SPRING,
STUDENTS AND FACULTY PROTESTED A
PROPOSED $450-MILLION DOLLAR
BUDGET CUT TO THE UNIVERSITY
SYSTEM OVER THE NEXT FOUR YEARS.
ARCHITECTURE STUDENT MINETTE
BONILLA WAS PART OF A DELEGATION
THAT MET WITH THE FISCAL
OVERSIGHT BOARD.
>> WE ASKED THEM POINT BLANK,
"DO YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CONSEQUENCES WILL BE OF THOSE
CUTS? DO YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CONSEQUENCES WILL BE FOR
STUDENTS AND THEIR ACCESSIBILITY
TO EDUCATION?"
"WE HAVEN'T DONE THOSE STUDIES."
SO THEY'RE JUST CUTTING OUT OF
SHEER NUMBERS WITHOUT KNOWING
ANY IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PEOPLE
THAT ARE SUFFERING THOSE CUTS.
>> Reporter: MORE BROADLY,
STUDENTS ALSO WANT A THOROUGH
AUDIT OF THE ISLAND'S PUBLIC
DEBT BY AN INDEPENDENT BODY.
BUT ABOVE ALL, STUDENTS LIKE
MARIO GONZALEZ NEVARES ARE
CRITICAL OF THE PROMESA LAW,
WHICH CREATED THE BOARD IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
>> PROMESA IS THE EXAMPLE OF
COLONIALISM IN THE 21ST CENTURY.
THIS LAW WAS CREATED
UNILATERALLY BY THE U.S.
CONGRESS, AND IT WAS IMPOSED
OVER PUERTO RICO. AND IT'S ONLY,
ONLY REASON TO EXIST IS TO MAKE
SURE THE BONDHOLDERS ARE PAID.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO'S $72-
BILLION DOLLAR DEBT IS OWED TO
BONDHOLDERS, OR CREDITORS, WHO
BOUGHT BONDS THAT FINANCED THE
ISLAND'S GOVERNMENT.
THAT INCLUDES LARGE INVESTORS
LIKE MUTUAL FUNDS AND HEDGE
FUNDS ON THE U.S. MAINLAND, AS
WELL AS LOCAL PUERTO RICANS.
THERE ARE THOSE ON THE ISLAND
WHO BELIEVE THAT THE BOARD IS
MORE CLOSELY ALIGNED TO THE
NEEDS OF THE CREDITORS, HOW DO
YOU RESPOND TO THOSE CRITICISMS?
>> I DON'T CONSIDER MYSELF
BEHOLDEN TO ANY PARTICULAR
BONDHOLDER CLASS.
WE'RE TRYING TO DO THE BEST WE
CAN UNDER EXTREMELY DIFFICULT
CIRCUMSTANCES, BUT THE REALITY
IS THAT WE'RE TAKING EVERYTHING
AND EVERYBODY INTO CONSIDERATION
AND TRYING TO BALANCE ALL THOSE
INTERESTS.
>> Reporter: BUT BONDHOLDERS ARE
WORRIED.
RAFAEL ROJO IS A SAN JUAN REAL
ESTATE DEVELOPER AND CHAIRMAN OF
BONISTAS DEL PATIO, A GROUP
REPRESENTING SOME OF THE 60,000
PUERTO RICAN BONDHOLDERS.
HE ESTIMATES THEY'RE OWED $15-
BILLION DOLLARS.
>> BEHIND WALL STREET, THERE'S A
LOT OF INDIVIDUAL PEOPLE WHO
HAVE THEIR SAVINGS IN THESE
INSTRUMENTS.
>> Reporter: ROJO IS ALARMED BY
THE PUERTO RICAN GOVERNMENT'S
PLAN TO PAY BACK LESS THAN A
QUARTER OF THE DEBT IT OWES OVER
THE NEXT DECADE.
>> IT'S QUITE CLEAR, AND IT'S
SCIENTIFICALLY IMPOSSIBLE TO SAY
OTHERWISE, IT IS THE BONDHOLDERS
WHO HAVE BEEN TARGETED AS THE
ONES WHO ARE GOING TO PAY FOR
THE CRISIS.
AND I THINK THAT'S A HUGE
MISTAKE.
>> Reporter: HE'D LIKE TO SEE
THE SIZE OF PUERTO RICO'S
GOVERNMENT SHRUNK EVEN MORE, AND
THE 78 SEPARATE MUNICIPALITIES
ON THE ISLAND CONSOLIDATE THEIR
SERVICES.
THE OVERSIGHT BOARD FORECASTS
THE ISLAND'S ECONOMY WILL
CONTINUE TO SHRINK THROUGH 2021
BEFORE STARTING TO GROW.
YET OUTSIDE ECONOMISTS, SUCH AS
NOBEL LAUREATE JOSEPH STIGLITZ,
WARN THE BOARD'S AUSTERITY
MEASURES WILL ALL BUT GUARANTEE
A SOCIAL AS WELL AS AN ECONOMIC
CATASTROPHE.
ARE THERE EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIES
ELSEWHERE IN THE WORLD THAT HAVE
EVENTUALLY GROWN UNDER
AUSTERITY?
>> PUERTO RICO'S SITUATION IS
VERY SPECIFIC.
IT IS UNLIKE GREECE IN THAT IT
IS NOT A SOVEREIGN NATION.
IF FOLKS HERE DO NOT CARE FOR
WHAT'S GOING ON, THEY WILL MOVE
OFF ISLAND.
COMPARISONS ARE DIFFICULT IN
LIGHT OF PUERTO RICO'S
TERRITORIAL SITUATION.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICO HAS
BEEN UNDER U.S. CONTROL SINCE
THE END OF THE SPANISH-AMERICAN
WAR IN 1898, AND IN 1947 WAS
GRANTED AN ELECTED GOVERNMENT.
BUT AS AN UNINCORPORATED
TERRITORY, THE U.S. CONGRESS IN
WASHINGTON CAN OVERRIDE THE
ISLAND'S LAWS, AND PUERTO RICANS
CANNOT VOTE FOR PRESIDENT AND
HAVE NO VOTING REPRESENTATION IN
CONGRESS.
THE APPOINTMENT OF A FISCAL
CONTROL BOARD AND THE EFFECT OF
AUSTERITY MEASURES ON THE ISLAND
HAVE RE-IGNITED A DECADES-OLD
DEBATE REGARDING PUERTO RICO'S
RELATIONSHIP TO THE UNITED
STATES.
MANY PEOPLE HERE, INCLUDING THE
GOVERNOR, BELIEVE A SOLUTION TO
THE ECONOMIC CRISIS WILL NEVER
BE FOUND UNLESS THE TERRITORY'S
POLITICAL STATUS IS RESOLVED
ONCE AND FOR ALL.
>> THE VOICE OF THE PUERTO RICAN
PEOPLE WAS LOUD AND CLEAR.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, 97% OF
PUERTO RICANS VOTED FOR THE
TERRITORY TO BECOME THE 51ST
U.S. STATE IN A REFERENDUM
ORGANIZED BY THE ISLAND'S PRO-
STATEHOOD GOVERNOR.
YET ONLY 23% OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS
TURNED OUT.
THE VOTE WAS HEAVILY BOYCOTTED
BY THOSE FAVORING INDEPENDENCE
AND THE STATUS QUO OF REMAINING
A COMMONWEALTH.
IT'S UP TO CONGRESS TO RATIFY
STATEHOOD, BUT PREVIOUS
REFERENDA HAVE BEEN IGNORED, AND
THE CURRENT MOVEMENT HAS SCANT
SUPPORT ON CAPITOL HILL.
>> IF WE'RE AMERICAN CITIZENS,
WE SHOULD STRIVE TO HAVE FIRST-
CLASS TREATMENT IN PUERTO RICO.
>> Reporter: FORMER PUERTO RICAN
SECRETARY OF STATE KENNETH
McCLINTOCK IS PRESIDENT OF
EQUALITY FOR PUERTO RICO", A
PRO-STATEHOOD LOBBY GROUP.
>> ONCE WE MOVE TO ORLANDO, OR
NEW YORK, OR TEXAS, OR NORTH
CAROLINA, WE'RE TREATED AS FIRST
CLASS CITIZENS.
WE HAVE THE RIGHT TO VOTE, WE
HAVE THE RIGHT TO CONGRESSIONAL
REPRESENTATION, WE HAVE THE
RIGHT TO PARTICIPATE IN EVERY
FEDERAL PROGRAM.
>> Reporter: McCLINTOCK BELIEVES
PUERTO RICO'S TERRITORY STATUS
LED TO THE CRISIS, IN PART,
BECAUSE PAST GOVERNMENTS WERE
FORCED TO BORROW FOR ESSENTIAL
SERVICES LIKE ROADS AND HEALTH
CARE.
FOR EXAMPLE, PUERTO RICO
RECEIVES MUCH LESS FEDERAL
FUNDING FOR MEDICAID THAN U.S.
STATES DO.
>> THE TRUTH IS THAT THERE WILL
NOT BE A STABLE FISCAL
SITUATION, ECONOMIC SITUATION IN
PUERTO RICO, UNTIL THERE'S
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
AND THERE WILL NOT BE A HEALTHY
ECONOMIC GROWTH RATE UNTIL THERE
IS EQUALITY.
>> I'M ONE OF THE PEOPLE THAT
BELIEVE THAT WE SHOULD
DEFINITELY ATTEND TO THE ISSUE
OF STATUS.
BUT IT'S NOT A MAGIC WAND THAT
WILL RESOLVE ALL OF OUR
PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: MANUEL NATAL, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN PUERTO RICO'S
OWN LEGISLATURE, FAVORS
REMAINING A COMMONWEALTH WITH
MORE ECONOMIC SOVEREIGNTY.
FOR EXAMPLE, HE'D LIKE CONGRESS
TO REPEAL THE CENTURY-OLD LAW
THAT REQUIRES ALL IMPORTS TO
ARRIVE ON AMERICAN MADE AND
MANNED SHIPS, WHICH MAKES ALL
FOOD AND GOODS MORE EXPENSIVE.
>> THE TOOLS THAT WE HAVE TO
ACHIEVE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN
PUERTO RICO, ONE CONGRESS MIGHT
GIVE IT TO YOU, ANOTHER CONGRESS
MIGHT TAKE IT AWAY.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR SOME ON THE
ISLAND, THE SOLUTION FOR PUERTO
RICO IS SEPARATING FROM THE U.S.
AND BECOMING A SOVEREIGN NATION.
>> PUERTO RICO IS A LATIN
AMERICAN, CARIBBEAN NATIONALITY
WITH ITS OWN IDENTITY.
>> Reporter: PUERTO RICAN
SENATOR JUAN DELMAU LEADS THE
PUERTO RICAN INDEPENDENCE PARTY,
THE THIRD LARGEST ON THE ISLAND.
>> (translated): AN
INDEPENDENT PUERTO RICO WOULD
HAVE POLITICAL AND LEGAL
AUTHORITY TO JOIN THE GLOBAL
COMMUNITY AND OPEN MARKETS WHILE
AT THE SAME TIME MAINTAINING
FRIENDSHIP AND COOPERATION WITH
THE U.S. BUT ON AN EQUAL
FOOTING, NOT IN POLITICAL
SUBORDINATION.
>> Reporter: WHILE CHALLENGES TO
THE STATUS QUO PERSIST, LAST
MONTH, THE FEDERALLY APPOINTED
FINANCIAL OVERSIGHT BOARD
APPROVED DEEP SPENDING CUTS TO
PUERTO RICO'S BUDGET.
>> REGARDLESS OF HOW ANYONE
FEELS ABOUT STATUS IN PUERTO
RICO, YOU NEED A BALANCED
BUDGET.
>> Reporter: THIS GRAFFITI ON
ONE SAN JUAN STREET READS "DOWN
WITH HIS MAJESTY JOSE CARRION"
>> IT MAKES ME SAD, AND YOU
KNOW, I'M NOT A POLITICIAN, SO
I'M LEARNING TO DEAL WITH
CRITICISM OF THAT NATURE.
>> Reporter: YET, CARRION SAYS
HE UNDERSTANDS THE CRITICISM
THAT HIS BOARD IS NOT
ACCOUNTABLE TO THE ISLAND'S
RESIDENTS.
>> THERE'S NO WAY ANYBODY COULD
CONCEIVABLY THINK THAT THIS IS A
DEMOCRATIC PROCESS.
BUT, HOW ABOUT LOOKING AT THE
POSITIVE SIDES.
THE LAW, IT PROVIDES US THE
OPPORTUNITY TO PROCURE A WAY
FORWARD, AND TO RESTRUCTURE, YOU
KNOW, $72-BILLION WORTH OF DEBT.
WE NEED TO TAKE THIS OPPORTUNITY
THAT CONGRESS HAS PROVIDED US
AND MOVE OUR PEOPLE AND OUR
ISLAND FORWARD.